Industrial Revolution | Definition, History, Dates, Summary, & Facts | Britannica Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search SUBSCRIBE Login SUBSCRIBE Home History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Games & Quizzes Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Lists Podcasts Spotlight Summaries Top Questions #WTFact Britannica Kids Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Videos Industrial Revolution Table of Contents Introduction & Top QuestionsCharacteristics of the Industrial RevolutionThe first Industrial RevolutionThe second Industrial Revolution References & Edit History Quick Facts & Related Topics Images & Videos For Students Pop Quiz: 15 Things to Know About the Industrial Revolution Industrial Revolution Key Facts Industrial Revolution Timeline Industrial Revolution Causes and Effects Quizzes European History Related Questions Where and when did the Industrial Revolution take place? How did the Industrial Revolution change economies? How did the Industrial Revolution change society? What were some important inventions of the Industrial Revolution? Who were some important inventors of the Industrial Revolution? Read Next Inventors and Inventions of the Industrial Revolution History of Technology Timeline The Rise of the Machines: Pros and Cons of the Industrial Revolution Molecular Machines: Making for the Future Discover Poker Hands Ranked 9 U.S. Presidents with the Most Vetoes How Deadly Is Quicksand? America’s 5 Most Notorious Cold Cases (Including One You May Have Thought Was Already Solved) Why Do Some Cicadas Appear Only Every 17 Years? Why Is a Baker’s Dozen 13? 10 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time Contents Politics, Law & Government Banking & Business Industrial Revolution: spinning room Vintage engraving showing the factory floor of the spinning room in Shadwell Rope Works, 1878. (more) Industrial Revolution Ask the Chatbot a Question More Actions Print print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite verifiedCite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions. Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook X URL https://www.britannica.com/event/Industrial-Revolution Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. External Websites Pressbooks - Industrial Revolution World Economic Forum - The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means, how to respond Khan Academy - The Industrial Revolution Spartacus Educational - The Factory System and the Industrial Revolution Digital History - The Industrial Revolution History Learning Site - Industrial Revolution Oklahoma State University Pressbooks - The Industrial Revolution Social Sci LibreTexts - The Industrial Revolution The British Academy - The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective (PDF) Loyola University Chicago - The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society National Geographic - Industrial Revolution and Technology Econlib - Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. Industrial Revolution - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) Industrial Revolution - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Ask the Chatbot a Question Written and fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors. The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Apr 11, 2025 • Article History Table of Contents Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot Quick Facts Date: 1733 - 1913 (Show more) Context: organized labour (Show more) Key People: Anthony F.C. Wallace (Show more) See all related content Top Questions Where and when did the Industrial Revolution take place?Historians conventionally divide the Industrial Revolution into two approximately consecutive parts. What is called the first Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-18th century to about 1830 and was mostly confined to Britain. The second Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-19th century until the early 20th century and took place in Britain, continental Europe, North America, and Japan. Later in the 20th century, the second Industrial Revolution spread to other parts of the world. How did the Industrial Revolution change economies?The Industrial Revolution transformed economies that had been based on agriculture and handicrafts into economies based on large-scale industry, mechanized manufacturing, and the factory system. New machines, new power sources, and new ways of organizing work made existing industries more productive and efficient. New industries also arose, including, in the late 19th century, the automobile industry. How did the Industrial Revolution change society?The Industrial Revolution increased the overall amount of wealth and distributed it more widely than had been the case in earlier centuries, helping to enlarge the middle class. However, the replacement of the domestic system of industrial production, in which independent craftspersons worked in or near their homes, with the factory system and mass production consigned large numbers of people, including women and children, to long hours of tedious and often dangerous work at subsistence wages. Their miserable conditions gave rise to the trade union movement in the mid-19th century. What were some important inventions of the Industrial Revolution?Important inventions of the Industrial Revolution included