Technology assessment of solar disinfection for drinking water treatment | Nature Sustainability Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature sustainability analyses article Technology assessment of solar disinfection for drinking water treatment Download PDF Analysis Published: 30 June 2022 Technology assessment of solar disinfection for drinking water treatment Inhyeong Jeon ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0341-46261, Eric C. Ryberg ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9390-951X1, Pedro J. J. Alvarez ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6725-71992 & …Jae-Hong Kim ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2224-35161 Show authors Nature Sustainability volume 5, pages 801–808 (2022)Cite this article 4876 Accesses 63 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Environmental impactWater resources AbstractPoor access to safe drinking water is a major sustainability issue for a third of the world’s population, especially for those living in rural areas. Solar disinfection could be the choice of technology considering the abundant sunlight exposure in infrastructure-limited regions. However, despite recent technological advances, it remains unclear which solar disinfection option is more broadly applicable and reliable, enabling the most efficient use of solar radiation. Here we examine the potential of five most typical solar-based, point-of-use water disinfection technologies, including semiconductor photocatalysis to produce hydroxyl radical, dye photosensitization to produce singlet oxygen, ultraviolet irradiation using light-emitting diodes powered by a photovoltaic panel, distillation using a solar still and solar pasteurization by raising the bulk water temperature to 75 °C. The sensitivity analysis allows us to assess how pathogen type, materials property, geographical variation in solar intensity and water-quality parameters interactively affect the effectiveness of these technologies under different scenarios. Revealed critical challenges point to the large gap between idealized materials properties and state of the art, the risk of focusing on select pathogens that show maximum inactivation effectiveness and the failure to consider uncertainties in water quality and geographical variations. Our analysis also suggests future pathways towards effective solar disinfection technology development and real-world implementation. You have full access to this article via Tomsk State University. Download PDF Similar content being viewed by others Solar water disinfection in large-volume containers: from the laboratory to the field. A case study in Tigray, Ethiopia Article Open access 07 November 2022 Scalable and high throughput photothermal water disinfection with negligible CO2 footprint utilizing nanostructured carbon coatings Article Open access 03 November 2023 Improved disinfection performance for 280 nm LEDs over 254 nm low-pressure UV lamps in community wastewater Article Open access 10 May 2023 MainOver 600 million people living in rural areas of low- to medium-income countries (LMICs) still lack access to basic drinking water services (an improved drinking water source that can be collected within 30 minutes of travel time)1,2,3. Waterborne infectious diseases continue to be the most prevalent cause of diarrhoeal morbidity and mortality in these regions4,5. The standard approach to provide safe potable water in urban areas has been centralized water treatment along with water distribution networks. For many sparsely populated rural communities, however, centralized water treatment and distribution is not a viable solution because of the lack of basic infrastructure and the high investment and maintenance cost. Consequently, point-of-use (POU) water treatment technologies have been extensively pursued as an alternative due to their relatively low cost, simple operation and proven effectiveness for reducing diarrhoeal disease burden6,7.It is noteworthy that regions with limited access to basic drinking water services largely overlap with areas receiving high surface sunlight intensity throughout the entire year8. Our analysis suggests that, among countries reporting less than 80% access to basic drinking water services in rural populations, the top 10% sunniest countries (the top 20 of 197 countries with both solar irradiation data and drinking water service access data) receive an average solar irradiation of 6.04 kWh m−2 d−1 (Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). This value is significantly greater than the global average of 4.70 kWh m−2 d−1 (28% greater, P < 0.0001). Further, rural populations of these countries have only 48% access to basic drinking water services, leaving 160 million rural residents of these 20 countries without access to a basic drinking water service. Therefore, solar-based POU water treatment technologies are primed to take advantage of abundant solar resources and expand access to potable water.Solar disinfection (SODIS), the practice of simply exposing polyethylene terephthalate bottles containing water to sunlight, has been the benchmark of near-zero-cost POU technologies9. However, only a small portion of the solar spectrum (ultraviolet A (UVA)) promotes disinfection by SODIS, and it takes upward of 30 hours of sunlight exposure to achieve 3-log (99.9%) inactivation of some viruses under typical weather conditions10. To better exploit solar energy, more advanced POU disinfection technologies have been explored8,11, such as photocatalysts or photosensitizers to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) and germicidal UV light-emitting diodes (LEDs) connected to photovoltaic (PV) cells. Technologies that convert solar irradiation to heat energy for localized heating of a pathogen-contacting surface12,13, pasteurization by bulk water heating14,15,16,17 and distillation and steam generation have also been developed18,19,20, and some are starting to be translated into commercial POU technologies7,21. Despite notable advances in the field, there is a dearth of information on how various solar POU technologies compare with each other in terms of best utilizing the solar irradiation and their broad applicability. Even when the energy input (solar irradiation) is fixed, such a comparison is often difficult due to the use of unrealistically strong irradiation in many studies. Different technologies require distinct types of pretreatment to remove interfering water constituents as well as pathogens that are not readily inactivated by the technology of choice. Different studies employ different target pathogens, and their selection is often driven by those already proven effective with the chosen disinfection approach. By contrast, the ineffectiveness of a specific technology for the