A combined stem-cell–gene therapy strategy for ALS | Nature Medicine Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature medicine news & views article A combined stem-cell–gene therapy strategy for ALS Download PDF News & Views Published: 12 September 2022 GENE THERAPYA combined stem-cell–gene therapy strategy for ALS Hideyuki Okano ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-7482-59351,2 Nature Medicine volume 28, pages 1751–1752 (2022)Cite this article 3402 Accesses 6 Citations 13 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects NeurologyNeuroscience A gene therapy product combines astrocyte replacement with stable delivery of a neuroprotective factor; a first-in-human study demonstrated safety and will inform the design of further clinical trials for this neurodegenerative disease. You have full access to this article via MA Group AG. Download PDF Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease with no curative treatment. Riluzole (an inhibitor of glutamate-mediated neurotransmission) and edaravone (a scavenger of free radicals) are approved as anti-ALS drugs, but only modestly slow disease progression. Therefore, new treatments are being developed, not only with small chemical compounds but also with new drug-discovery modalities such as biologics (including antibodies), regenerative medicines, gene therapies, gene editing technologies, antisense oligonucleotides and mRNA-based medicines1.ALS is characterized by the selective loss of upper and lower motor neurons, but dysfunctional astrocytes play a crucial role in the development of the disease2 — which suggests that healthy astrocytes exert a protective effect on motor neurons. Glial-cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is a potent growth factor for motor neurons3,4, and in animal models of ALS, an ex vivo gene therapy strategy combining astrocyte replacement and GDNF release resulted in protection of motor neurons5,6. In this issue of Nature Medicine, Baloh et al.7 report the first-in-human trial (a phase 1/2a study) of this strategy in 18 patients with ALS.Human neural progenitor cells from the developing cortex can be expanded enormously and transduced with GDNF-expressing lentivirus; using this cell line source, Baloh et al. have created a current good manufacturing practice (cGMP)-compliant, ex vivo, allogeneic gene therapy product, named CNS10-NPC-GDNF. They found that transplanted CNS10-NPC-GDNF could engraft in the spinal cord, where the cells survived and differentiated into astrocytes. In their paper, the group describe an entire translational story, with preclinical animal data — including dose-ranging studies, tumorigenicity and toxicology studies, and large-animal safety studies — culminating in a phase 1/2a dose-escalation trial in 18 patients with ALS. The clinical protocol is unique, as the cells were transplanted only on one side of the spinal cord, with the non-transplanted leg being used as a control. In ALS, both legs generally lose motor function at similar rates over time (whether fast or slow), so this is a compelling way to evaluate treatment effects8. Moreover, it is important to note that this treatment requires only a one-time delivery — as the cells were expected to survive and secrete GDNF for the life of the patient.The current study by Baloh et al.7 met its primary endpoint of safety at 1 year, with no negative effect of the transplant on motor function in the treated compared to the untreated leg. The major secondary endpoint was the decline in leg strength. Although the differences were not statistically significant, the high-dose cohort showed a consistently slower rate of decline in the treated leg at all time points. One patient experienced a dramatic preservation of function on the treated side at 3 years after transplantation. It should be noted that most of the patients had late-stage disease at the time of treatment; as this treatment employs a neuroprotective strategy, it may be reasonable to expect better results when treatment is initiated earlier — although this will require clinical validation.Postmortem tissues were collected from 13 patients and, notably, the results showed that grafted cells had survived and expressed GDNF in all 13 of them. This indicates that an immune-suppression regime of only 1 year was sufficient to protect the grafts for up to 3.5 years. On the other hand, postmortem tissues also revealed the occurrence of benign neuromas — masses of proliferating Schwann cells — around the injection site, which were not seen by MRI. These neuromas were likely caused by damage to the dorsal root entry zone during injection, and subsequent release of GDNF could have stimulated the damaged Schwann cells to proliferate. Although most grafts were observed in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, the side where the surgical approach was made, the few patients with grafts in the ventral horn had no negative effects. The patient with remaining function in the treated leg had a large graft in the ventral horn. The dorsal grafts led some patients to experience some pain, which was effectively treated with pain medication. These side effects of the treatment must be evaluated in the context of the lethality of ALS and the overall benefit–risk profile for patients.On the basis of this initial safety study, future studies will aim to perform cell injections that avoid the dorsal root entry zone and target deeper into the ventral horn to provide protection to motor neurons, and will also aim to treat patients at earlier stages of the disease. However, ALS involves the loss of both lower motor neurons in the spinal cord and upper motor neurons in the cortex. The current trial’s safety data, as well as preclinical data in the rodent spinal cord, along with further safety data in rodent and non-human primate motor cortex, have paved the way for CNS10-NPC-GDNF to be delivered to the upper motor neurons in humans9. In a subsequent phase 1/2a trial currently underway (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05306457), CNS10-NPC-GDNF will be delivered unilaterally to the motor cortex